src/pages/glossary.md, before:

---
last_update:
    date: 6/20/25
    author: krblackwell
description: Glossary/dictionary to define words and technical terms used on the site. 
tags: ['glossary']
draft: False
unlisted: False
---

# 📘 Glossary for words and definitions used on this website

- **best practice** \
  A recommended way of doing something that’s widely accepted as clear, effective, and efficient. It helps you avoid problems later on.
  
  ```python
  # for example, using descriptive variable names is a best practice
  user_age = 12
  ```
- **cast**\
  Changing a value from one data type to another (e.g. from a string to an integer).

  ```python
  age = "12" # age as a string
  age = int("12")  # casts a string to an integer
  ```

- **code standards**\
  Rules or guidelines for writing clean, consistent code (often project- or language-specific).

  ```python
  # Following code standards like consistent indentation and proper naming
  def greet_user(name):
      return f"Hello, {name}"
  ```

- **concatenate**\
  To link things together, like combining two strings into one.

  ```python
  full_name = "Ada" + " " + "Lovelace"
  ```

- **convert**\
  To change a value from one form to another, such as a number to text (similar to "cast").

  ```python
  num_as_str = str(42)  # Converts integer to string
  ```

- **f-string**\
  A way to format strings in Python using curly braces to insert variables.

  ```python
  name = "Toby"
  greeting = f"Hello, {name}!"
  ```

- **integer**\
  A whole number, positive or negative, without decimals (e.g. 5, -3, 42).

  ```python
  score = 100  # This is an integer
  ```

- **kernel**\
  The core part of a computer program or environment that runs and manages code, especially in tools like Jupyter Notebooks.

  ```python
  # In Jupyter, the kernel runs this code cell
  print("The kernel executed this cell")
  ```

- **markdown**\
  A lightweight text formatting language used to style text (like **bold** or `code`) in files.

  ```markdown
  **This is bold text in markdown**
  ```

- **nested**\
  When one structure is placed inside another, like a list within a list or an `if` statement inside a loop.

  ```python
  for i in range(3):
      if i % 2 == 0:
          print(f"{i} is even")
  ```

- **pep8**\
  Python’s official style guide that outlines how to write readable and consistent Python code.

  ```python
  # PEP8 suggests using lowercase with underscores for variable names
  # user_name is a variable, and is in what's called "snake case"
  user_name = "Seth"
  ```

- **print**\
  A function that shows output in the console or terminal.

  ```python
  print("Hello, world!")
  ```

- **string**\
  A sequence of characters, usually text (e.g. `"hello"` or `'123'`).

  ```python
  message = "This is a string"
  ```

- **user**\
  A person interacting with the software or code.

  ```python
  user_input = input("Enter your name: ")
  ```

- **variable**\
  A named container in code used to store data values.

  ```python
  x = 10  # x is a variable holding the value 10
  ```

Commit message:

Im being bad and committing lots of different things at once and some dont have anything to do with my plan for this particular branch

src/pages/glossary.md, after:

---
last_update:
    date: 6/20/25
    author: krblackwell
description: Glossary/dictionary to define words and technical terms used on the site. 
tags: ['glossary']
draft: False
unlisted: False
---

# 📘 Glossary for words and definitions used on this website

- **best practice** \
  A recommended way of doing something that’s widely accepted as clear, effective, and efficient. It helps you avoid problems later on.
  
  ```python
  # for example, using descriptive variable names is a best practice
  user_age = 12
  ```
- **cast**\
  Changing a value from one data type to another (e.g. from a string to an integer).

  ```python
  age = "12" # age as a string
  age = int("12")  # casts a string to an integer
  ```

- **code standards**\
  Rules or guidelines for writing clean, consistent code (often project- or language-specific).

  ```python
  # Following code standards like consistent indentation and proper naming
  def greet_user(name):
      return f"Hello, {name}"
  ```

- **concatenate**\
  To link things together, like combining two strings into one.

  ```python
  full_name = "Ada" + " " + "Lovelace"
  ```

- **convert**\
  To change a value from one form to another, such as a number to text (similar to "cast").

  ```python
  num_as_str = str(42)  # Converts integer to string
  ```

- **f-string**\
  A way to format strings in Python using curly braces to insert variables.

  ```python
  name = "Toby"
  greeting = f"Hello, {name}!"
  ```

- **integer**\
  A whole number, positive or negative, without decimals (e.g. 5, -3, 42).

  ```python
  score = 100  # This is an integer
  ```

- **kernel**\
  The core part of a computer program or environment that runs and manages code, especially in tools like Jupyter Notebooks.

  ```python
  # In Jupyter, the kernel runs this code cell
  print("The kernel executed this cell")
  ```

- **markdown**\
  A lightweight text formatting language used to style text (like **bold** or `code`) in files.

  ```markdown
  **This is bold text in markdown**
  ```

- **nested**\
  When one structure is placed inside another, like a list within a list or an `if` statement inside a loop.

  ```python
  for i in range(3):
      if i % 2 == 0:
          print(f"{i} is even")
  ```

- **pep8**\
  Python’s official style guide that outlines how to write readable and consistent Python code.

  ```python
  # PEP8 suggests using lowercase with underscores for variable names
  # user_name is a variable, and is in what's called "snake case"
  user_name = "Seth"
  ```

- **print**\
  A function that shows output in the console or terminal.

  ```python
  print("Hello, world!")
  ```

- **string**\
  A sequence of characters, usually text (e.g. `"hello"` or `'123'`).

  ```python
  message = "This is a string"
  ```

- **syntax**\
  The rules for writing code so the computer can understand. It's like writing in complete sentences to be very clear about what you're saying.\
  Any Python code you write has to be in the right syntax so Python knows what you want.
  
  ```python
  print("Hello World!")
  ```
  
  You have to remember all the parentheses on both sides, quotes on both sides, and spell `print` the right way.

- **user**\
  A person interacting with the software or code.

  ```python
  user_input = input("Enter your name: ")
  ```

- **variable**\
  A named container in code used to store data values.

  ```python
  x = 10  # x is a variable holding the value 10
  ```
