---
slug: how-does-the-lab-work
title: How does the Lab work?
authors: krblackwell
tags: [introductions, python, lab]
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

One of the hurdles to coding is setting up an environment and getting ready. That's usually the first few lessons. On this site, you can code online for free in your browser. The lab runs entirely in your browser and is powered by JupyterLite, a lightweight version of the Jupyter Notebook platform.

<!-- truncate -->

## How Does the Lab Work

You might be wondering whether the lab environment is safe. It is, and I’m 100% comfortable letting my kids use it.

The lab runs entirely in your browser and is powered by JupyterLite, a lightweight version of the Jupyter Notebook platform. According to the JupyterLite team:

>“The goal is to provide a lightweight computing environment accessible in a matter of
>seconds with a single click, in a web browser and without having to install anything.”

That means:

- No installation required

- Fast and lightweight

- Runs in your browser (even on your phone)

- Use it on a tablet, laptop, or desktop computer for the best experience, but it will work on mobile. The web pages look better on a small screen than the notebooks.

So if you're limited to a small tiny screen, focus on the lesson pages. You can open them in the Lab when you're ready to do some code.

JupyterLite is affiliated with Jupyter.org, a well-known and trusted organization in the scientific computing community. I didn’t build the lab myself, but I’ve tested it, and feel confident recommending it.

## What Happens If Something Goes Wrong

Since this runs in your browser, it’s relatively safe and isolated. I’ve stress-tested it with infinite loops — and while you can't always stop runaway code directly in the notebook, you can simply close the browser tab to shut it down.

Worst case scenario you can delete browser cache from the last hour or whenever you were using it. Just remember that deleting browser cache will delete other things your browser might be saving for you like shopping carts that aren't saved in an account or passwords or credit card info, depending on your settings and browser.

## A few safety notes

Don’t download or run notebooks from sources you don’t trust. Even though the environment is limited, a malicious notebook from outside my website could trick you into clicking a bad link or crash your browser.

Files you upload are only stored in your browser's memory (local storage). I won’t see them, and they’ll disappear if you clear your browser cache.

Don't put anything in there that you want to keep. It's a temporary space, not permanent storage.

The lab doesn’t connect to an external server. It’s self-contained. This is perfect for our purposes, but it is a limited environment.

So enjoy learning coding without the set up! I think if someone wants to code and get really into it, they can learn to set up stuff later.

