docs/python/01-foundations/02-python-foundations-variables.md, before:

---
sidebar_label: variables
sidebar_position: 2
last_update:
    date: 6/14/25
    author: krblackwell
description: Introductory Python - What are variables?
tags: ['python']
draft: False
unlisted: False
---

# What are variables?

When you code, you'll always be using something called a `variable`. A variable is like a container that holds information. It helps you to do a few things:

- Use the same information again without writing it over and over.
- Make many changes in one place.
- Make a program more flexible.

## Learning Objectives

In this notebook, you'll learn about what a variable is, how to use it, and some of the different types.

- A variable holds information.
- Variables are assigned values.
- There are a few variable types we'll start with: strings and integers.

## A variable holds information

Sometimes you'll want to save a word or phrase, numbers, or bigger things so you can refer back to them later or change them up.

Let's look at an example without a variable, and then use a variable.


```python
print("Hello, World!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello, World!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

We're printing a phrase here, but what if we want to change who we say "Hello" to!

We can use a variable to do that.


```python
name = "Katie"
print("Hello,", name)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello, Katie


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

The variable can hold a name! It does more than that for us.

## Variables are assigned values

When we put information into a variable, we are assigning it a value. You use only 1 equal sign for this.

`name = "Luke"`

The name Luke is assigned to the variable name.

:::tip
`name` is a string!
:::

## There are different variable types

Programming languages, like Python, have many different variable types. Two common ones are strings and integers.

### Strings

"This is a string."

"string!"

"striiiiiiiiiiiiiiing"

### Integers

Numbers you've seen without a decimal are often integers. Most of the numbers you use and see everyday are integers.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are integers

100 is an integer

### Strings can be added together

Adding a string is called `concatenation`. We will `concatenate` strings.

Note I added a space after "Hello."


```python
print("Hello " + "You! " + "How are you doing?")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello You! How are you doing?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

This can be added into a variable also!


```python
greeting = "Hello " + "You! " + "How are you doing?"
print(greeting)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello You! How are you doing?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

And we can split it up into more variables.


```python
name = "Sam"
greeting = "Hello " + name + "! " + "How are you doing?"
print(greeting)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello Sam! How are you doing?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

Notice we can change name much more easily this way. When we have a variable that's used a lot, this is very handy.


```python
name = "Krissy"
greeting = "Hello " + name + "! " + "How are you doing?"
print(greeting)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello Krissy! How are you doing?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

### Numbers can be used in math

Numbers can be printed in strings, but have to be `converted` into strings first in Python. This means we change an integer 5, for example, into a string.

Don't worry if you don't know what `str()` is. It makes the integer variable `number1` a string.

All I want you to remember is that when you mix numbers and letters together to print, you need it to all be a string.


```python
number1 = 5
number2 = 3
print("It's " + str(number1) + "!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    It's 5!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

I can do math, too. Look how I can use two variables in lots of different ways. If I ever need to change one of them, I only have to change it in one place—and it automatically updates everywhere else it’s used!


```python
print(number1 + number2)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    8


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
print(number1 - number2)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    2


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
print(number1 * number2)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    15


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Recap

In conclusion, we learned about variables, a way to hold and change out information in a program.
Using variables helps us to make our code more flexible.

Commit message:

removed docusaurus specific images and filler. added my own. added jupyter lite badges to pages so they can open in interactive notebooks. added links back to lessons on the site from notebook. changed site default colors for light and dark modes. changed footer by adding my own links.

docs/python/01-foundations/02-python-foundations-variables.md, after:

---
sidebar_label: variables
sidebar_position: 2
last_update:
    date: 6/14/25
    author: krblackwell
description: Introductory Python - What are variables?
tags: ['python']
draft: False
unlisted: False
---



<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD041 -->
<a href="/lite/lab/index.html?path=python/01-foundations/02-python-foundations-variables.ipynb" target="_blank">
  <img src="https://jupyterlite.rtfd.io/en/latest/_static/badge.svg" alt="Open in the Lab!" />
</a>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD041 -->


<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line MD041 -->
[Go back to Home](/) - [Go to Python lessons](/docs/python) - [Go to Foundations section](/docs/python/foundations)

# What are variables?

When you code, you'll always be using something called a `variable`. A variable is like a container that holds information. It helps you to do a few things:

- Use the same information again without writing it over and over.
- Make many changes in one place.
- Make a program more flexible.

## Learning Objectives

In this notebook, you'll learn about what a variable is, how to use it, and some of the different types.

- A variable holds information.
- Variables are assigned values.
- There are a few variable types we'll start with: strings and integers.

## A variable holds information

Sometimes you'll want to save a word or phrase, numbers, or bigger things so you can refer back to them later or change them up.

Let's look at an example without a variable, and then use a variable.


```python
print("Hello, World!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello, World!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

We're printing a phrase here, but what if we want to change who we say "Hello" to!

We can use a variable to do that.


```python
name = "Katie"
print("Hello,", name)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello, Katie


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

The variable can hold a name! It does more than that for us.

## Variables are assigned values

When we put information into a variable, we are assigning it a value. You use only 1 equal sign for this.

`name = "Luke"`

The name Luke is assigned to the variable name.

:::tip
`name` is a string!
:::

## There are different variable types

Programming languages, like Python, have many different variable types. Two common ones are strings and integers.

### Strings

"This is a string."

"string!"

"striiiiiiiiiiiiiiing"

### Integers

Numbers you've seen without a decimal are often integers. Most of the numbers you use and see everyday are integers.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are integers

100 is an integer

### Strings can be added together

Adding a string is called `concatenation`. We will `concatenate` strings.

Note I added a space after "Hello."


```python
print("Hello " + "You! " + "How are you doing?")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello You! How are you doing?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

This can be added into a variable also!


```python
greeting = "Hello " + "You! " + "How are you doing?"
print(greeting)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello You! How are you doing?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

And we can split it up into more variables.


```python
name = "Sam"
greeting = "Hello " + name + "! " + "How are you doing?"
print(greeting)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello Sam! How are you doing?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

Notice we can change name much more easily this way. When we have a variable that's used a lot, this is very handy.


```python
name = "Krissy"
greeting = "Hello " + name + "! " + "How are you doing?"
print(greeting)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello Krissy! How are you doing?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

### Numbers can be used in math

Numbers can be printed in strings, but have to be `converted` into strings first in Python. This means we change an integer 5, for example, into a string.

Don't worry if you don't know what `str()` is. It makes the integer variable `number1` a string.

All I want you to remember is that when you mix numbers and letters together to print, you need it to all be a string.


```python
number1 = 5
number2 = 3
print("It's " + str(number1) + "!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    It's 5!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

I can do math, too. Look how I can use two variables in lots of different ways. If I ever need to change one of them, I only have to change it in one place—and it automatically updates everywhere else it’s used!


```python
print(number1 + number2)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    8


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
print(number1 - number2)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    2


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
print(number1 * number2)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    15


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Recap

In conclusion, we learned about variables, a way to hold and change out information in a program.
Using variables helps us to make our code more flexible.
