docs/python/01-foundations/03-python-foundations-f-string.md, before:

---
sidebar_label: f-strings
sidebar_position: 3
last_update:
    date: 6/14/25
    author: krblackwell
description: Introductory Python - What are f-strings?
tags: ['python']
draft: False
unlisted: False
---

# What are f-strings?

Now that you know how to use `print()` and `variables`, we can work with `f-strings`! This is a way that some people find easier to write long blocks of text that have variables in the middle.

They look like this:


```python
type_of_thing = "an f-string"

print(f"This is {type_of_thing}")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    This is an f-string


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Learning Objective

- `f-strings` are special strings that let you insert a variable.
- `f-strings` can help print nicely formatted messages.
- An alternative to `f-strings` is using `+` pluses or `,` commas.

## `f-strings` are special strings that let you insert a variable

Note the `f` at the beginning of the string. It's not inside the quotes.

We created a variable called `name`, and assigned it a value.

`name` is referenced with curly brackets in the string.

If we say we have an f-string, we should put a variable in there in curly brackets. Your code will still run, but it's a good habit to always make an f-string an f-string with its curly brackets and variable.


```python
name = "Ella"
print(f"Hello, {name}!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello, Ella!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
exclamation = "Wait"
word = "example"

print(f"{exclamation}! Another {word} already?")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Wait! Another example already?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

:::tip
If you say you're using an f-string, make sure you actually put a variable inside the curly brackets {}!
:::


```python
repeat_word = "quotes"
glossary_word = "balance"

print(f'I can use single {repeat_word}')
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I can use single quotes


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
print(f"blah blah no variable - Hey wait, this isn't best practice!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    blah blah no variable - Hey wait, this isn't best practice!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

See? The code ran! But following the tip is `best practice`.

:::tip
Best practices` are smart habits that help you write code that’s clean, easy to understand, and less likely to have mistakes.
:::
Think of best practices like brushing your teeth or wearing a helmet — you could skip it, but doing it the right way helps you in the long run!

### More examples of f-strings




```python
age = 11
print(f"I am {age} years old.")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I am 11 years old.


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
a = 5
b = 7
print(f"{a} plus {b} equals {a + b}")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    5 plus 7 equals 12


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## `f-strings` can help print nicely formatted messages

If we’re making a text-based game, for example, we might want to print the same messages for every player — like instructions, story parts, or game updates. There are also other times when it’s helpful to print neat and clear messages, even in less exciting programs I use for work. We’ll talk about those a bit later.


```python
name = "Ava"
score = 95

print(f"Great job, {name}! You scored {score} points!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Great job, Ava! You scored 95 points!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
player = "Max"
score = 42
print(f"Player {player} scored {score} points!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Player Max scored 42 points!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
level = 5
print(f"🎉 Congrats! You’ve reached level {level}! Keep going!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    🎉 Congrats! You’ve reached level 5! Keep going!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
player_name = "Hoda"
print(f" Welcome, {player_name}! Get ready for an amazing adventure!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

     Welcome, Hoda! Get ready for an amazing adventure!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
lives = 2
name = "Vik"
print(f"⚠️ Watch out, {name}! You only have {lives} lives left!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    ⚠️ Watch out, Vik! You only have 2 lives left!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Use `+` pluses instead of f-strings

You don’t have to use an f-string to put a message together.\
You can also use `+` signs to connect strings and variables.

:::tip
The `+` plus can create a big string variable.
:::
Here’s how it works:
Put the variable in between the parts of the sentence, and use `+` to glue everything together.


```python
sentence2 = "A variable string to insert. "

print("I have a string here. " + sentence2 + "And another string")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I have a string here. A variable string to insert. And another string


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
sentence2 = "A variable string to insert. "
big_sentence = "I have a string here. " + sentence2 + "And another string"

print(big_sentence)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I have a string here. A variable string to insert. And another string


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

:::tip
Note the spaces added. The + won't add space between your strings for you.
:::
However, you need to be mindful of the variable types you are gluing together. A string won't join with a number when you use `+` plus.

:::warning
Numbers with the pluses have to be converted to a string with something like `str()`.
:::


```python
number = 5

print("Number is: " + str(number))
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Number is: 5


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Use `,` commas instead of f-strings

You can use `,` commas to connect strings and variables similar to the `+`.\
However, commas can't join strings together inside a variable like pluses can.

:::tip
Commas will add a space for you.
:::


```python
variable = 5


print("Variable =", variable)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Variable = 5


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

In a `print()`, you can mix numbers and strings like this without converting the numbers to strings.


```python
print("Here's another example.",
      "Multiple lines can go like this.",
      "Commas are separating the strings, but they print on a single line.")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Here's another example. Multiple lines can go like this. Commas are separating the strings, but they print on a single line.


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

See the next example also. We can separate a long line into multiple lines.


```python
print("Here's another example. "
      "With plus "
      "and multiple lines")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Here's another example. With plus and multiple lines


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

But it doesn't work with a variable in there. You need the plus or comma to join the lines. Remember the comma adds a space between strings.


```python
sentence_part = "and multiple lines"

print("Here's another example. "
      + "With plus "
      + sentence_part)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Here's another example. With plus and multiple lines


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
sentence_part = "and multiple lines"

print("Here's another example.",
      "With commas",
      sentence_part)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Here's another example. With commas and multiple lines


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

You might wonder, "Why should I separate my lines like this?" In Python, we try to keep line lengths shorter than 80 characters. It's a good habit to get into.

- It makes your code easier to read.
- It fits nicely on the screen (even small ones).
- It helps others understand your code faster.

The below code block is one that needs to be on two lines so it meets this best practice.


```python
repeat_word = "quotes"
glossary_word = "balance"

print(f'I can use single {repeat_word}, but remember how to properly '
      f'{glossary_word} your types of {repeat_word} around each other.')
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I can use single quotes, but remember how to properly balance your types of quotes around each other.


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Recap

In sum, we covered f-strings and their alternatives.

Commit message:

removed docusaurus specific images and filler. added my own. added jupyter lite badges to pages so they can open in interactive notebooks. added links back to lessons on the site from notebook. changed site default colors for light and dark modes. changed footer by adding my own links.

docs/python/01-foundations/03-python-foundations-f-string.md, after:

---
sidebar_label: f-strings
sidebar_position: 3
last_update:
    date: 6/14/25
    author: krblackwell
description: Introductory Python - What are f-strings?
tags: ['python']
draft: False
unlisted: False
---



<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD041 -->
<a href="/lite/lab/index.html?path=python/01-foundations/03-python-foundations-f-string.ipynb" target="_blank">
  <img src="https://jupyterlite.rtfd.io/en/latest/_static/badge.svg" alt="Open in the Lab!" />
</a>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD041 -->


<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line MD041 -->
[Go back to Home](/) - [Go to Python lessons](/docs/python) - [Go to Foundations section](/docs/python/foundations)

# What are f-strings?

Now that you know how to use `print()` and `variables`, we can work with `f-strings`! This is a way that some people find easier to write long blocks of text that have variables in the middle.

They look like this:


```python
type_of_thing = "an f-string"

print(f"This is {type_of_thing}")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    This is an f-string


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Learning Objective

- `f-strings` are special strings that let you insert a variable.
- `f-strings` can help print nicely formatted messages.
- An alternative to `f-strings` is using `+` pluses or `,` commas.

## `f-strings` are special strings that let you insert a variable

Note the `f` at the beginning of the string. It's not inside the quotes.

We created a variable called `name`, and assigned it a value.

`name` is referenced with curly brackets in the string.

If we say we have an f-string, we should put a variable in there in curly brackets. Your code will still run, but it's a good habit to always make an f-string an f-string with its curly brackets and variable.


```python
name = "Ella"
print(f"Hello, {name}!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Hello, Ella!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
exclamation = "Wait"
word = "example"

print(f"{exclamation}! Another {word} already?")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Wait! Another example already?


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

:::tip
If you say you're using an f-string, make sure you actually put a variable inside the curly brackets {}!
:::


```python
repeat_word = "quotes"
glossary_word = "balance"

print(f'I can use single {repeat_word}')
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I can use single quotes


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
print(f"blah blah no variable - Hey wait, this isn't best practice!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    blah blah no variable - Hey wait, this isn't best practice!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

See? The code ran! But following the tip is `best practice`.

:::tip
Best practices` are smart habits that help you write code that’s clean, easy to understand, and less likely to have mistakes.
:::
Think of best practices like brushing your teeth or wearing a helmet — you could skip it, but doing it the right way helps you in the long run!

### More examples of f-strings




```python
age = 11
print(f"I am {age} years old.")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I am 11 years old.


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
a = 5
b = 7
print(f"{a} plus {b} equals {a + b}")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    5 plus 7 equals 12


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## `f-strings` can help print nicely formatted messages

If we’re making a text-based game, for example, we might want to print the same messages for every player — like instructions, story parts, or game updates. There are also other times when it’s helpful to print neat and clear messages, even in less exciting programs I use for work. We’ll talk about those a bit later.


```python
name = "Ava"
score = 95

print(f"Great job, {name}! You scored {score} points!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Great job, Ava! You scored 95 points!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
player = "Max"
score = 42
print(f"Player {player} scored {score} points!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Player Max scored 42 points!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
level = 5
print(f"🎉 Congrats! You’ve reached level {level}! Keep going!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    🎉 Congrats! You’ve reached level 5! Keep going!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
player_name = "Hoda"
print(f" Welcome, {player_name}! Get ready for an amazing adventure!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

     Welcome, Hoda! Get ready for an amazing adventure!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
lives = 2
name = "Vik"
print(f"⚠️ Watch out, {name}! You only have {lives} lives left!")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    ⚠️ Watch out, Vik! You only have 2 lives left!


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Use `+` pluses instead of f-strings

You don’t have to use an f-string to put a message together.\
You can also use `+` signs to connect strings and variables.

:::tip
The `+` plus can create a big string variable.
:::
Here’s how it works:
Put the variable in between the parts of the sentence, and use `+` to glue everything together.


```python
sentence2 = "A variable string to insert. "

print("I have a string here. " + sentence2 + "And another string")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I have a string here. A variable string to insert. And another string


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
sentence2 = "A variable string to insert. "
big_sentence = "I have a string here. " + sentence2 + "And another string"

print(big_sentence)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I have a string here. A variable string to insert. And another string


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

:::tip
Note the spaces added. The + won't add space between your strings for you.
:::
However, you need to be mindful of the variable types you are gluing together. A string won't join with a number when you use `+` plus.

:::warning
Numbers with the pluses have to be converted to a string with something like `str()`.
:::


```python
number = 5

print("Number is: " + str(number))
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Number is: 5


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Use `,` commas instead of f-strings

You can use `,` commas to connect strings and variables similar to the `+`.\
However, commas can't join strings together inside a variable like pluses can.

:::tip
Commas will add a space for you.
:::


```python
variable = 5


print("Variable =", variable)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Variable = 5


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

In a `print()`, you can mix numbers and strings like this without converting the numbers to strings.


```python
print("Here's another example.",
      "Multiple lines can go like this.",
      "Commas are separating the strings, but they print on a single line.")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Here's another example. Multiple lines can go like this. Commas are separating the strings, but they print on a single line.


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

See the next example also. We can separate a long line into multiple lines.


```python
print("Here's another example. "
      "With plus "
      "and multiple lines")
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Here's another example. With plus and multiple lines


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

But it doesn't work with a variable in there. You need the plus or comma to join the lines. Remember the comma adds a space between strings.


```python
sentence_part = "and multiple lines"

print("Here's another example. "
      + "With plus "
      + sentence_part)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Here's another example. With plus and multiple lines


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->


```python
sentence_part = "and multiple lines"

print("Here's another example.",
      "With commas",
      sentence_part)
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    Here's another example. With commas and multiple lines


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

You might wonder, "Why should I separate my lines like this?" In Python, we try to keep line lengths shorter than 80 characters. It's a good habit to get into.

- It makes your code easier to read.
- It fits nicely on the screen (even small ones).
- It helps others understand your code faster.

The below code block is one that needs to be on two lines so it meets this best practice.


```python
repeat_word = "quotes"
glossary_word = "balance"

print(f'I can use single {repeat_word}, but remember how to properly '
      f'{glossary_word} your types of {repeat_word} around each other.')
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD009 -->
<div class="output-cell">

    I can use single quotes, but remember how to properly balance your types of quotes around each other.


</div><br/>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 MD009 -->

## Recap

In sum, we covered f-strings and their alternatives.
